
>> This video is going to give you a
concrete example of how clustering and
principal component analysis that we
covered in last week's lectures can be
applied to understand data that comes from
a particular example, where we want to be
able to classify actions based on some
observations that we've taken.
So, this is going to be an example why
we're using the data from, that's
collected using a Samsung Galaxy S3.
So, this is a smartphone and inside the
smartphone, there's an accelerometer.
The accelerometer is used so that when you
turn the camera on each side, it can
change the orientation of the video.
That's a pretty cool feature.
But we're actually going to be using a
data for something else when we do this
analysis.
So, that acelerometer actually measures
how much activity is going on in, on three
different axes.
And so a study was performed where that
data was collected for a number of
individuals and each individual
participated in several different types of
activities.
And during those activities, they had the
smartphone in their pocket, and the
accelerometer measured the types of
activity that were going on.
So, this data is available from the UCI
Machine Learning Repository and I've given
you the URL here for the data.
It actually comes in several different
files and I've done just some light
processing to create a slightly more
processed version of the dataset, which is
easier to distribute.
So, that dataset is available from this
URL, which you can see here.
And I've also made the dataset available
from the course website.
So, the first thing that I do is I
download the file, and I load it into R.
And so, if I look at the names in the
variables in this dataset, you can see
that they are all measures of
acceleration.
And these measures of acceleration are
actually summarized over a, a period of
time.
And so, you see that summary statistic is
given for each measurement.
Either it's a mean over a period of time
or a standard deviation or a median
absolute deviation.
And then, you can see which axis the
measurement has been taken on whether its
the x-axis, or the y-axis, or the z-axis.
In the dataset, we also have a variable
called activity and that variable tells
you what that the subject was doing while
they were participating in the study.
So, they could be laying, sitting,
standing, walking, or walking up and down
stairs.
And so, you could see that the activities
are sort of equally-distributed across
these different types of activities.
And so, what we're going to be trying to
do in this analysis is use these
measurements that were collected with the
Samsung Galaxy S3.
And predict what sort of activity the
person is participating in.
This is the kind of thing that is becoming
really widely-used now in a lot of medical
studies, but is also being used in other
places as well, to try to be able to
determine what sort of things are, people
are doing with their smartphones.
So, the first thing that we can do is we
can start taking a look at some of the
variables them, themselves.
And so, what we've done here is we've
first created a vector that is a numeric
value for the different activities.
So in this case, 1 is for standing, 2 is
for sitting, 3 is for laying, 4 is for
walking, 5 is for walking down, and 6 is
for walking up.
And then, what I can do is I can take the
data just for the first subject.
So, this dataset actually contains data on
multiple subject but we'll only be looking
at the first subject here and I can plot
the first variables.
The first variable is the mean
acceleration on the x-coordinate axis and
so then I can color it by the activity
that the person was participating in.
So, you can see, for example, that when a
person was laying or standing still, there
wasn't as much activity that was going on
whereas when they were walking down or
walking up, their mean activity varied a
lot more.
You can also plot that same variable for
the y-axis and you actually have x, y, and
z for each of these different
measurements, but here's just a couple of
them.
So, the next thing that we could do is we
could actually just try to cluster the
data based on the average acceleration in
the x, y, and z-coordinates.
So, what I've done here is I've created a,
a distance matrix where I calculate for
the first subject, I'm going to say, okay,
I'm going to look at all of their
activities and look at the first three
variables.
The first three variables being the core,
the measurements in thex, y, and z-axis of
the average acceleration.
And what I'm going to do is say, you know,
can we calculate the distance between
those measurements, those acceleration
measurements between all of the different
activities that were performed by subject
one.
And then, perform a hierarchical
clustering like we performed in the
previous week's lecture.
And if I plot that clustering, I can see,
when I've colored it by activity that it
actually doesn't cluster the activities
very nicely.
You can see that all the sort of the
different colors are mixed together so
that they're not actually, not very well
distinguished.
And you can actually kind of see why that,
that would be true, you can see that
despite there being some differences, say,
between standing and walking, many of the
activities have sort of similar patterns
of variation across this, their activities
that they're performing.
So, since clustering based on the mean
acceleration in each of the access
directions didn't seem to bear too much
fruit, we can actually take a look at some
of the other variables in our data set.
So, the next set of variables that we
might look at are the max acceleration in
each of the access directions.
And so, what we've plotted here now are
for the first subject.
This is again, all of the different
measurements that we take for that first
subject, and they're color coated by
activity.
And so, you can see say, for example, that
the dark blue are the walking activities
and the light blue are the walking up, or
sorry, walking down and the Pink are
walking up.
And so, what you can see is that the max
acceleration now distinguishes there
activities substantially better then the
acceleration, the mean acceleration did.
You can see, for example, that standing
and laying have very low max acceleration
which isn't very surprising and that
walking up and down and just any kind of
walking actually has a much higher max
acceleration.
So, based on these variables, you'd expect
to see a little bit better clustering.
And so, we can actually perform a
clustering again on just the activities of
the very first subject.
We can take the variables ten through 12,
those are the max acceleration variables
for those subjects, and see how close
those measurements are for different
activities and perform a hierarchical
clustering on them.
And so, what you actually end up seeing is
that walking and walking up are still not
very well-distinguished but walking down
now gets kind of its own cluster over here
on the left the light blue points.
So, we've actually improved our clustering
a little bit over using just the mean
acceleration.
And we might want to ask ourselves, is
there a way that we could actually start
to distinguish out these other activities
that weren't distinguished by the max
acceleration on its own?
So, one way we could do that is we could
look at the singular value decomposition,
which is something we also talked about
last week.
So, what we could do is calculate the
singular value decomposition on the
Samsung data.
So, again, this is the Samsung data, where
the activities for the first subject are
in rows.
And in the columns, we have all of the
variables that have been collected with
the accelerometer.
And I've left out just the last two
columns.
And the reason why I've left those out is
because one is the subject variable, and
one is the activity variable.
So, we're actually not interested in
those.
We want to just look at the Samsung data
and see if the patterns in those data can
actually distinguish the activities.
So, when I calculate the singular value
decomposition, I get, remember, three
matrices.
I get u, v, and d.
And so, u is the left singular vector and
that's what I've plotted here, so I've
plotted the, the first left singular
vector, that's the first column of u.
And the second left singular vector,
that's the second column of u, so these
vectors show across, again, all of the
different activities, what the most
prevalent or the most common patterns that
explain the most variation in the data set
are.
So, we can see that the first singular
vector sort of not surprisingly,
distinguishes all the activities where
you're sedentary, laying down, or sitting
or standing, from activities where you're
doing something like walking, walking up,
or walking down.
And so, this is a singular vector looks
actually quite a bit like the max
acceleration vector.
And so, it's maybe not necessarily helpful
for us in improving our analysis and our
ability to cluster the, the differences
between these categories here, the active
categories.
So, if we look at the second singular
vector, this is going to be left singular
vector, it's going to be orthogonal to the
first left singular vector with our and
only the sense that these two things are
uncorrelated with each other.
And so, what we can see here now is
actually they are walking down and walking
up, the light blue and the purple points
are actually pretty well-distinguished in
the second left singular vector.
So, what we are seeing here is a pattern
in the day that it explains a lot of
variation that actually separates out
categories that weren't separated out by
the max.
So, the next thing that we want to know
is, well, as you'll remember from the
singular value decomposition lecture, this
left singular vector actually represents
the average of potentially multiple
patterns that are observed in the dataset.
So, we want to actually go back and see if
we can discover, what are the variables
that contribute to this pattern that we're
observing here.
So, the way that we do that is that we
look at the right singular vector that
corresponds to the left singular vector
that gives that pattern.
So again, we, we are looking at the second
left singular vector.
So now, we look at the second right
singular vector.
So, this is the v component of the svd and
it's the second column of v and we plot
that.
And so now, this is actually in the
previous case, we were looking at the one
subject across all their activities.
Now, what we're looking at is all the
different variables so this is the
variables 1 through 561 that were
collected with the Samsung device and what
we're seeing here are the weights that
each of these variables contribute to that
pattern that is the second left singular
vector.
And so, for example, what we might want to
do is pick out some of these variables
that have a very high level of the weight,
so that means they're contributing a lot
of, of, of the variation to that pattern
that we've observed in the left singular
vector.
So, we might pick out, say, the one that's
the maximum and include that variable when
we do our clustering.
So, what I did is just that.
I calculated what the max variable the max
weight was for the second right singular
vector.
So, this is the variable that contributed
the most to the second left singular
vector's pattern.
The one that distinguished walking up from
walking down.
And then I can actually re-calculate the
distance matrix.
Now, I'm using again the variables 10
through 12.
These are the max acceleration variables,
and then I'm also taking this max
contributor variables.
So, the one that contributes the most to
that pattern of variation.
And I re-performed my clustering analysis
and so what I can see now is if you'll
remember from the previous slide, the, the
first clustering with the max
accelerationing had the dark blue points
and the pink points basically entirely
intermixed.
And now, you see that they've kind of been
separated, and the reason why is that we
picked out a variable using sort of a
multivariate technique.
We identified a variable that was
contributing to a major pattern in the
dataset that separated these activities
out.
So, we're able to sort of start to
identify the activities that distinguish
the patterns of variation in activity
monitoring from these Samsung devices.
The cool thing about these discovery
techniques is that we can actually go back
and see what variable that we've picked to
include in our model and include in our
clustering.
And, in this case, we're looking here at
the mean frequency of, of the changes and
acceleration for the z-variable.
And it makes sense because what we've done
is we've identified a variable that
separates out walking from walking up a
set of stairs and so you can imagine that
there would be differences in the
frequency of, of changes in the z -axis if
you would use that variable.
And it's cool because we discovered that
without having to know in advance what
that variable is, we actually just it in
the patterns in the data that best
explained differences between the
activities.
So, we can also apply K-means clustering
to these data.
And so, I'm going to do this to sort of
illustrate how K-means gives you a little
bit different information and also behaves
a little bit differently than the other
clustering approaches.
So, what I've done here is I've applied
the K-means clustering algorithm,
algorithm to the Samsung data only again
from the first subject.
And again, I've eliminated the subject
indicator and the activity indicator, so
this K-means clustering is being performed
not on the activity data itself, only on
the Samsung data that was collected about
acceleration and I told k-means that I
would like 6 different clusters by telling
it that there are 6 centers.
And so then, what I can do is I can
actually make a table that says what
cluster you were assigned to versus what
activity that person was actually
performing.
So, for example, for this first subject,
we see that we cluster their activities
into six different clusters.
And the first cluster contains some of the
time when the subject was laying, some of
the time when it was, when that subject
was sitting and some of the time when they
were standing.
We can see that cluster 2 and cluster 5
actually split up the walk down activities
into two separate clusters.
Similarly, cluster 3 and cluster 4
actually separate out the walking
activities.
So, this is important to note first of
all, that even though we told K-means that
there were six clusters, and there
actually are six clusters, it doesn't
necessarily identify the clusters that we
were thinking about in advance.
It doesn't necessarily identify laying,
sitting, and standing separately, because
it's not clear that the variables that
we've passed it will, will perfectly
cluster in that way.
But also, as I mentioned in my earlier
lectures, the K-means clustering algorithm
is actually stochastic.
It depends, it gives it a random start and
then the random start is updated and
updated until you get the final centroids.
And so, I actually only started it one
time because that is the default for
K-means clustering here so I can actually
see what happens if I run it the exact
same algorithm again.
And so, I ran the exact same command
again, I gave it exactly one start, I get
told that 6 centers that passed at the
exact same data and I get a different set
of clusters out.
So, you can see now cluster 1 has mostly
the walking variables but also one walk
down.
You can see that walk is separated out
across clusters 1 through 3.
You can see, for example, that walk up is
primarily cluster 4 with a little bit of
laying and sitting included.
So again, you have a really hard time
distinguishing laying, sitting, and
standing.
So, those variables get spread out.
Or those activities get spread out here in
cluster 6.
But the important thing to note is if you
look at where these clusters land, they
are very different than the first time I
ran K-means clustering with only one
start.
So, as I mentioned, there's one way that
we could try to address that and that is,
instead of giving K-means one opportunity
to fit the algorithm, we actually give it
100 random starts, and then do sort of
averaging to identify what cluster that
you end up in.
So, if I do that, now I get yet another
clustering from the K-means clustering
algorithm, so in this clustering cluster 1
has mostly sitting and standing.
Cluster 2 has mostly laying and sitting.
Cluster 3 is now almost exclusively is a,
just exclusively walking.
Cluster 4 is mostly walk down.
And cluster 6 here is mostly walkup, so it
looks like at least for these activities,
we're doing a somewhat better job of
separating those activities out, once
we've told K-means to try to do this
multiple times with random restarts, and
average over those restarts.
If I run it again with a 100 starts, I do
get something very slightly different and
in particular, I might get the ordering of
these labels differently, but you can see
it's pretty stable, all 49 individual or
49 activity points got classified into
cluster 2 and that's for walk down.
And if you go to the previous slide, you
see it was cluster 4 in the previous slide
but again it was the 49 activity points
for walk down.
So, the cluster names aren't necessarily
stable.
But the points gets assigned much more
stably to a specific cluster if I do more
random restarts.
So, the cool thing about K-means
clustering is that, the, then you can go
back and actually look at what each of
these clusters means.
Or in other words, what are the variables
contributing to these clusters.
What are the patterns that they look like?
So, we can actually look at the cluster 1
variable centers.
And so, this is the, actually the, first
cluster.
This is the one that corresponds to mostly
laying down activity.
And these are the first ten variables.
So, these three variables represent mean
acceleration x, y, and z.
And then these variables here, the tenth
variable say, for example represents the
max acceleration in the x-direction.
So, you can see, for example, that for
laying a lot of the values are, sort of,
very low.
The acceleration values aren't changing
very much.
The second cluster is actually
corresponding to the, mostly to walking.
And for this cluster, you actually see
that a lot of the acceleration values are
actually quite a bit higher.
So, we can actually even look at which
variables are higher for the walking
center and so we're able to actually kind
of distinguish between difference clusters
based on what their cluster centers look
like.
So, that was a quick tour of the different
clustering algorithms applied to the
Samsung data.
I've actually only looked at subject 1 for
all of these analyses.
But an interesting thing to do is see if
you can say, cluster subjects together
using hierarchical clustering or K-means
clustering.
And I'ld encourage you to take a try at
that.
