
This week, we're going to be talking about
exploratory analysis, and we're going to
start off with graphing. So, why do we use
graphs in data analysis? There's actually
a bunch of different reasons that you
might use graphs for communicating
information about data. You might want to
understand the data properties and it
might be too hard to actually look at the
whole data matrix of numbers itself. You
might want to be able to discover new
patterns or associations between variables
that might have been surprising, and you
not been able to look at the data. It can
also be used to suggest modelling
strategies. We'll be talking about
statistical modelling starting next week,
and one thing that's very useful is to use
graphs to try to inform what kind of
modelling strategy that you'll use. And to
debug analyses, we'll also be talking
about how you can use graphs and plots to
determine that where your statistical
modeling might have gone wrong. And
finally, to communicate results to other
people. So, exploratory data analysis and
exploratory graphs start by focusing on
these first four steps, and not on
communicating results to other people. So,
we are going to first talk about the types
of graphs that you might use just to
communicate to yourself, to try to
understand the data set, not to try to
pretty them up and to show them to other
people. Before we actually dive in to
these specific type of graphs, I thought I
tell you a little bit about the
characteristics of exploratory graphs.
They are made quickly. the, the goal is to
actually explore the data as fast as you
can without having to spend time prettying
up the graphs and making them perfect. You
can think of it as a rough draft graph for
your later final analysis. A large number
of the graphs are made. So, most of these
will get discarded before you actually
perform your final analysis. But you have
to make a large number then to explore all
the potential avenues that the data might
take you in. And then, the goal is for
personal understandin g, not necessarily
for communicating to other people. So, if
you don't need color or different sized
points to be able to communicate to
yourself, you don't necessarily have to do
that in your exploratory graph. Color and
size are primarily used for information
communication to yourself rather than to
make things aesthetically pleasing so that
they'll be easy on the eye when people
look at your data analysis. I'm going to
start off with a little bit of background
before we dive in very specific types of
graphs. And so, I'm going to talk about a
little bit of theory and experimentation
that has been done in the graphical
display of data. So, the first thing that
I'd thought I'd talk about is the ways
that you can display a comparison between
two quantitative measurements. So, here
are nine different ways that you could
actually display them. so, for example,
you could, if you had 2 measurements, you
could, say, there were 8 and 4, you could
put them on a common scale like this, and
then it's very, relatively easy to be able
to tell which one is bigger than the
other. You could also plot them but on
different scales or on scales that aren't
aligned to each other. You could make 2
different lines of different links and
compare them. Or you can create, say, 2
different angles that were proportional to
the 2 data points, or 2 circles of
different areas. You can also do things
more complicated like volume of shapes,
curvature, or shading. Depending on the
type of task that you're doing for your
analysis, some of these ways of encoding
information might be easier or harder for
people to understand. And, in fact, people
have done experiments to try to determine
what are the easiest ways to communicate
information and what are the most
effective ways to communicate information
in graphical displays. So, I'm going to
tell you about a couple of those
experiments and then summarize some of the
key ideas you should think about when
creating your graphs. So first of all, if
you're going to be making compariso ns
between quantiative measurements, here's
an experiment that tells you a little bit
about how those measurements and how those
quantiative displays should be arranged.
So, these are five times of graphs, and
they were shown to 55 people in this
experiment in the paper that I've linked
to here. And they were asked to compare
the measurements for each of the two dots
in each plots. So, compare the value for
this bar to this bar, then value, compare
the value of this, the length of this bar
to the length of this bar. The same thing
here, these two dots represent the two
values being compared. These two dots
represent the two values being compared,
this, this box versus that box, and so
forth. So, in each case, the goal is to
try to compare which value is larger. And
in some cases, the values are easier to
distinguish that in others. So, we're
going to be talking about this in just a
minute. But if to, the two values are
right next to each other and encoded as
links, they're very easy to distinguish.
On the other hand, if the two values are
encoded on different scales and for and
not right next to each other, they might
be harder distinguish. So, here are the
results of the analysis that they
performed when they did the experiment.
So, what you see here are the different
types of graphs, so type 1 through type 5,
and in each case, the goal was, again, to
compare the values that were indicated by
the dots. On the x-axis, is actually the
value of the error that they achieved and
the dot is the actual mean error, and then
the, the two bars are the confidence
intervals for that error. We'll be talking
about confidence intervals a lot next
week. But what you can see is that the
easiest, the one with the smallest amount
of error was when the two bars were
displayed right next to each other and
they were compared on a common scale. And
it got more difficult as the tasks move
from left to right. So, it actually shows
you a little bit about what are the kinds
of ways that you should display data in
order to most accurately communicate the
differences that your trying to identify
between measurements in a quantitative
fashion. Another experiment that they
performed, and this is the experiment that
caused, I think, a lot of people to not
like pie charts. So, you'll often hear
that statisticians don't like to use pie
charts, or they'll rail against pie charts
in their discussions. And the reason was
largely because of this experiment. So
they, in this experiment, there were 5
different data points, and they were
quantified either as an angle, so the goal
here is to compare the angle of B to the
angle of A, to see which one is larger,
versus just comparing the lengths, A
versus B versus C and so forth. And so
again, they performed a similar experiment
where they showed these graphs to people
and they asked them to make different
comparisons and then they showed the error
rate for the, the two different kinds of
comparisons. And so, in the case of
position, using the position of one of
those bar charts, the error rate was very
low, whereas, when you were using an
angle, the error rate was much higher. And
so, that's because there's actually
psychological and neurological reasons why
it's easier for people to make comparisons
on links rather than areas or angles. They
actually did further experiments. I'm not
going to talk too deeply about this, but
you should, you can take a look at this
paper if you want to learn a lot more. And
they basically showed that using a
positions on common axes or not aligned
axes are still much better than using
measurements of length, angle, slope, or
the area of circles, or the area of blobs.
And so, basically, what this is suggesting
is that when possible, when your trying to
perform a graphical displays of data, you
should try to use position as opposed to
length and then definitely not the circle
area or blob area or angle of the graphs
as a way of comparing quantitative
information.
So to summarize some ideas, this is, of
course, a really brief summary of what is
an incredibly large area of research into
the graphical display of data and the
summary would be use common scales when
possible, so try to make things, try to
make your plots of it if you're comparing
lengths, or if you're comparing, comparing
positions, they should be on a common
scale. and when possible, use position
comparisons. Again as I've said before,
pie charts aren't neccesarily the
statisticians best friend because angle
comparisons are frequently hard to
interpret so they should only be used
sparingly. We didn't discuss to much about
this in the experimental results I just
showed you but 3D bar charts and
comparisons of volume are actually much
harder to perform then some of the other
tasks and so should also be avoided
whenever possible. So, I'm going to do,
give you a couple of examples of the
different kinds of plots that you might
make and what they might be useful for.
And I'm going to use this American
community survey data that we've actually
used in a previous quiz for making these
plots and for being, showing you the
different kinds of comparisons that we can
do. So first, I'm going to just read the
data into R using this command here. you,
alternatively, if you had the ss06pid.csv
somewhere else, you would have to change
the path to be able to load the file in.
So, the first type of plot that we're
going to be talking about is called a box
plot. And so, a box plot is a type of plot
that you would use for a quantitative
variable and its goal is to try to give
you an idea of what the distribution of
the data looks like. So, what you see here
is the command that you'd use to create
this plot. You would type boxplot, and
then pass it a quantitative variable. I've
also changed the color to be blue so that
the plot is a little bit easier to see,
but this isn't necessary to make the plot.
So, what you see here is the box plot of
the ages for this study that we're looking
at. And so, what you can see is that there
are several different values that are
encoded in this box plot. The t hick line
in the middle of the box plot is the
median, so that is the measure of the
center of the distribution. And, in this
case, it's just under 40. You also see the
75th percentile and the 25th percentile of
the data, as the upper and lower bounds of
the box. And then, what you see here are
some whiskers, these are called whiskers.
And then up in the top, it's the value
that is 1.5 times the 75th percentile. And
here it's the 25th percentile, 1.5 times
lower. And so, if there were actually
values that were either larger or smaller
than that, you would actually see those
values sort of as dots, represented above
and below the whiskers. So, what is this
plot good for? It gives you an idea of the
distribution of the data. You can see,
first of all, if the data have a really
large number of values spread out, or you
can see if it's very compact distribution.
You also can see that if the distribution
is symmetric or not by where this black
line falls in the box. If the black line
is sort of close to the center of the box,
the distribution is a little bit more
symmetric. Whereas, if you see the black
line sort of pulled toward the, either the
top or the bottom of the box, you actually
see that the distribution would be a
little bit asymmetric and that you would
see more of the values being low or more
of the values being high. So, this gives
you some information about the quantiative
distribution of a single variable. And so,
you can actually use boxplots to make
comparisons. Again the goal is to make
them on the common scale. So, you can
actually use the boxplot command to make
comparisons of quantiative variables on a
common scale. In this case, what I've done
is, again, I've used the boxplot command.
But now, I take this quantitative
variable, and I apply a formula. We'll be
talking a lot more about formulas when we
talk about statistical modeling in R. But
basically, what I do is I say I include
this little tilde which says, show me the
distribution of age broken down by the
difficulty dr essing variable.
And so, the difficulty dressing variable
has two different values and so I've
created a factor here, one level of the
factor for each level of the difficulty
dressing. So difficult DDRS equal to 1
means that they have difficulty dressing,
and DDRS equals 2 means they don't have
dificulty dressing. And so, what you can
see here is that the individuals that have
difficulty dressing actually have a much
higher age on average, than the indivudals
that don't have difficulty dressing which
is sort of not surprising. but it's a,
you, by putting this answer of a common
scale, it makes it possible for you to
compare sort of the senders of the
distribution but also the variability of
these two distributions. Now, something
that isn't encoded in this plot so far is
any indication as to how many individuals
we have that come from that have
difficulty dressing versus how many
individuals we have that don't have
difficulty dressing. And so, we can
actually encode that information in with
the variable or with a parameter called
varwidth. So again, this is the same
boxplot, boxplot of age and we use the
tilde to say I would like it broken down
by whether it's, you know, have difficulty
dressing or not. Then I've also passed it
2 colors, blue and orange, and these
colors correspond to the 2 different
groups of the difficulty dressing factor.
And I've also passed it names, yes and no,
so that I can actually see whether, which
individuals do have difficulty dressing
and which don't. And then, I pass it, this
parameter varwidth equals true. So, by
passing it varwidth equals true, the width
of the box is proportional to number of
observations that we have in that group.
And so, you can see here, for example,
that the group that has difficulty
dressing, we have very much smaller number
of those individuals than we do in the
group that doesn't have difficulty
dressing. So, ideally, if you're making
comparisons like this, you'd like to see
about an equal number of observations in
the two groups. Yo u'd like the two boxes
to be about the same width. And this gives
you some idea. If this is much, much
smaller than that, the difference in say,
centers between the two distributions
might not be quite as meaningful because
this might not be very many data points at
all that are contributing to this estimate
of the center here. So, another type of
plot that you can make is called a
barplot. So, we talked, saw an example of
those barplots earlier when we were
discussing the different kinds of plots,
and how comparisons on length are maybe
not as useful as comparisons on position.
So, this is an example where you would
make a comparison on position. In this
case, what I've done is I've, I've made a
table of the different values here of this
variable CIT in the data set and what I've
been able to do here is then make a count
of each level of this variable CITS 5
levels. And so I made a barplot of these
levels and what it does is it now makes a
bar that's, the height of the bar is equal
to the data value that you're seeing. So,
the first level of CIT has about 14,000
values and the second level has much
smaller number of values and that it's
sort of increasing up to 5. So, what this
allows you to do at a glance is to see
sort of the number of varia observations
that you have in any particular class.
It's very useful for breaking down sort of
tables of qualitative variables, but it
can also be used to compare the, sort of
the means of quantitative variables, and
so forth, using the barplot command.
Next are histograms. So, histograms are
sort of like box plots and the goal is to
quantify or sort of look at a univariate
distribution of data or single variable
distribution of data. And so, what I've
done here is I've made a histogram with
the hist command. Again, I passed it the
age variable and I colored it blue to make
it easier to see. So, this is what a
histogram looks like. so what a histogram
is, it's a little bit different than a
barplot. What it does is, it says, okay, I
am going to look at all the, how many
values in the data set of age do I see
between 0 and, say, this looks like about
4. So, in the data set, I see about 1,200
values, a little over 1,200 values that
are between 0 and 4. Then, it goes and it
looks between 4 and 8 and so for, and it
looks and sees how many values that are
there, and you can see sort of that
there's not quite 1,200 values between 4
and 8. And it goes on and on like this.
And so, for example, in the way out here,
you can see that between, say, 88 and 90,
there actually aren't very many values at
all and so, this bar is much, much lower.
So, the nice thing here is it gives you a
little bit of information about the
distribution and maybe a little more
information in the boxplot in the sense
that you can actually see the shape of the
distribution here, so you can see that
there is sort of relatively large amount
of small ages and there's also a
relatively large amount sort of in middle
age. But sort of, in this place in
between, there are fewer values and also
sort of out at the tail, there are fewer
values, which is a little bit more
information than you got from the boxplot.
So, another thing that you can do with
histograms is you can actually set the
number of breaks. So, this is the number
of break points there are. You can tell it
instead of breaking it down between you
know, 0 and 4, you can say, I would like,
you know, there'd be a lot more bars. So,
for example, this bar might be now just
the values between, say, 0 and 1, and so
you can see that there's quite a large
number of those values in the data set and
you can actually sort of see the full
distribution broken down much more fine
grain by setting the breaks to be larger
as a parameter in this data set. I've
also, in this case, changed the title of
the plot using the main parameter to age
which makes it a little bit easier to
communicate what's going on here. So
again, this is on the frequency scale and
you're able to see that the frequencies
and the observations of a particular size.
Ano ther way you can this is you can
actually create what's called a density
plot. So, a density plot is like a
histogram but it's been smoothed out. So
to do that, I actually first use this
density command and so I pass it at the
age, the quantitative variable age to the
density command. And then, I make a plot
of that object that gets created with the
density command. And I tell it, in this
case how thick I want the line to be. This
is lwd, is how thick you want the line to
be. So, by setting, it's, by default equal
to 1, by setting equal to 3, I get a
slightly thicker line here. And again, I
make the color blue so it's a little bit
easier to see. Again, what you see here is
the age distribution. And so now, you see
density, which is a little bit different
than frequency. So the difference between
density and frequency that you saw in the
previous histogram, is the shape is sort
of similar as you saw in the histogram.
But what's going on here is, instead of
calculating the exact number that appear
between zero and one, it's looking at
something like the percentage of the
observations that we see that are between
zero and one. So, it's something like a
little under 1% are this value here, and
whereas, for sort of people that are above
80, the percent is even much smaller. The
other thing to note here is that because
it's been smoothed, you see that this,
this shows the same sort of shape that the
histogram showed, but you now, by
smoothing, have also induced a little bit
of air at the boundaries. And so, for
example, we actually haven't observed
anybody with age smaller than zero or age
greater than a 100. But the smoother
actually kind of extends a little bit
farther out, so you have to be a little
careful about interpreting near the
boundaries. The reason why you'd want to
use density instead of, say, a histogram
is that you can actually overlay the
distributions for different say, genders
of the age variable. So, what I've done
here is I first created a, a density based
on all of the age mea surements that we
have for all of the individuals in this
study. And then, I also subset that data
set to only the individual whose sets
variables are equal to 1, those are all
the males. And so now, I actually make a
density of the ages of just the males in
the study. And so, what I can do is I can,
again, plot the density function that I
calculated for the age variable. And so,
that appears in blue. And so, you can see
that, that distribution looks like this.
You can see the blue line there. And then,
I can use something that's called lines to
add another line to this plot. And so,
when I use lines, I pass it the other
density, the one I calculated for males
and I color that one in orange. And so,
you can see actually the distribution for
males is very, very similar to the overall
distribution. But there are some slight
differences in the frequency of ages for
males versus the ages of everyone,
overall. And so, the, the nice thing about
this is that you can compare multiple
distributions, even though there might be
some slight sort of error in terms of
displaying information, it makes it easy
to compare multiple distributions whereas,
with histograms, that's not that, not as
easy. So, those are some very basic
univariant plots that we'll be talking
about. And in the next lecture, we'll
cover some more complicated plots.
