
This is the second video about exploratory
graphs. So remember from the first video
that the reasons that we used graphs and
data analysis are both for our own
personal understanding as well as to
communicate results to other people And so
exploratory graphs, as you'll recall, are
mostly focused on creating graphs that are
useful for you as the data analyst and the
goal is not necessarily to communicate
them to other people. We'll talk about
that, communicating with graphs, in the
next lecture. So remember that the
characteristics of exploratory graphs are
primarily that they're made quickly, you
make a large number, and that the, you
don't necessarily take time to clean those
graphs up. So we're going to go back to
the housing data that we've been using as
an example. So this is again reading in
the housing data as a csv file if the file
is ss06pid.csv is in a different directory
you're going to need to change the path
before reading the data in. So the next
type of plot that we're going to be
looking at is what's called a scatter
plot. So this is the, the type of plot
that you're starting to make, to be able
to make, visualize relationships between
variables. we're going to be talking a lot
about scatterplots, because scatterplots
are probably the most widely used,
graphical tool for exploratory data
analysis. So the components or the
parameters that are important for a
scatterplot are x and y. Those are the two
variables you'll be plotting. Also the
type, we'll talk about what that means in
a minute. Xlab and Ylab are commands, are
parameters that let you set the variable
names that appear for the axis here. Xlim
and Ylim let you set the width and length
of the axis. CEX is the. Sort of the size
of the points that you see. Color is the
color of the points, and bg is sort of the
background of the points for specific
kinds of points. So if you want to see a
lot more about the different kind of
parameters, and there are a ton that you
can set for scatter plots. You can see,
you can type ?pa r and that will tell you
a lot about all the different kind of
parameters that you might set. That.
So first we're going to talk about a
scatter plot, and in r, since it's sort of
the most important plot for performing
data analysis. It gets the plot command.
So we just type plot and then we give it
two variables that are quantitative. in
this case. We're going to plot commuting
time. JWNP is commuting time, versus wage,
so this is the actual wages that you
earned in the last year. I'm going to tell
it use pch equals 19, so this is actually
the character type that it's going to use
for the plot. If you leave it as default,
it'll use open circles for the plot, but
here I like closed circles better. And
then I'm going to set the color to be
equal to blue. And so what you see here is
a scattered plot where you got, on the x
axis is the first variable that you have
to plot and on the y axis is the second
variable. And each point represents one of
the observations of that you passed at
these variables. So you get. A point here
means that, for this data value in the
vector of commuting times and wages, it
had a commuting time, in minutes, of
something like 70 minutes, and it, this
person had a wage of something like
$150,000. And so the plot actually has to
be made with two variables that are of the
same length, so the commuting time and the
wages have to be of the same length if
you're going to make a scatter plot,
because each of these points corresponds
to one of the points in the two vectors.
So one of the things that you can see
right away is you can see strange patterns
in the data set like, for example, here
you got this straight line, which are a
bunch of people with the same reported
wage, but different actual values of
commuting time and so you might think this
seems sort of strange. It might be because
of the way that the data are coding and
indeed if you go look at the way that the
data are coded you'll see that these
values, up here, all in a line because of
the way that the data are cod ed.
So in addition to sort of visualizing the
relationship between the 2 variables, if
there is one, you can actually sort of
pick out particular problems with the data
or sort of weird patterns in the data that
you don't think are necessarily due just
to chance. They might be due to the way
the data were collected. So, another thing
that you can do on that previous plot, you
could see that some of the points were
sort of hard to see the difference between
them. So, you could change the cex
parameters, cex equals zero point 5 here.
And, so, now I actually see that the dots
are a little bit smaller. And, so, you can
see the separation between dots a little
bit better. You could actually make it
even smaller than that. And, you would
sort of. Sort of break up some of these
chunk down here in the lower left hand
corner which is a little bit hard to see.
So the size of the points matters. Also
the size of the axes matters, if you set
the x lim or y lim, it might be easier or
harder to see these points. You can also
use color similar to the way that we use
color in the box plots in the previous
lecture. And so what you can do is again,
you're going to send two continuous
variables to the plot command, so we're
going to use again the commuting time and
the wage. And again I'm going to set the
pch equal to 19, cause I like the filled
in circles. But now I let the color of the
points be equal to this variable sex. So
you, if you look at this variable sex, in
it takes on values 1 or 2. To be able to
do this trick that I'm doing right now,
you have to pass the col perameter, the
color perameter, a, a vector that has
actually integer value so In this case its
1 and 2. You shouldn't try to do this if
your variable, say, is if sex was equal to
either male or female then it would
necessarily work. Then again I said the
cex equal to 0.5, so its easier to see,
and so now what does this plot show. It's
again commuting time on the x axis and
wage on the y axis. But you see that all
the values where sex is eq ual to 1 are in
black. So those are the males, and all the
values that, where sex is equal to 2.
Those are the females, are in red. So you
can actually see, but there's slightly
different distribution for the men versus
the women. In particular, you'll see that
there's one red dot appears and there's
numbers of black dots and so it gives you
some idea about not only the relationship
between these two variables but how it's
different, based on the third variable. So
it allows you to physically expand it
beyond two dimensions when you're making
this type of plot. This is a very common
thing to do. You'll see it in my example
data analysis that I've used color
frequently to illustrate a third variable
when I'm showing the relationship between
2 other variables. You can also use size
to illustrate the third variable. This can
be, really useful in some cases and kind
of hard to see in the other cases. So,
here what I've done is, I've actually
calculated variable. this is a new
variable that is the percentage of the max
age that each value is. So, I take the
ages of the individuals observed in the
study and I divide it by the maximum age.
So, what I get is the percentage of the
max age left. And so what I can do is
actually make a plot again these two
variables, the commuting time versus the
wage and I can make it in blue with filled
in circles but now what I can do is I can
make the size of the points proportional,
well in this case it's half of the
percentage max of the age and so what you
can see is again, you see All of this,
sort of the data points by wage and
commuting time, and you can see that the
points that are really, really small
correspond to individuals that are
actually sort of younger, and the points
that are much larger correspond to
individuals that are older. So like I
said, sometimes this can be really useful
to be able to use size because you can
also use size and coloring Combinations
and try to visualize the relationship
between four variables. But in this case
it's a little bit hard to see the
difference between these dots unless you
have a very eagle eye it's pretty hard to
tell. And so using size is useful but it
should be reserved probably for if you're
already using color for something else. So
the other thing that you can do is when
you're creating these plots you can start
overlaying lines or plots lines or points
on these graphs so that you can sort of
visualize relationships. So again, I make
the plot of wages versus commuting time
here, and then I can use the LINES command
Just like I did before with the density
plots. And what I can do is I can actually
plot, In this case, what I'm doing is I'm
just repeating the value 100, a bunch of
times for the x values. And then I'm
actually plotting the, wages on the y
values. And so, what that does is. Since
the X value, there's only one X value and
a bunch of Y values. It makes a vertical
line. And I can make that a gray with, you
know, and set the width of the line that
I'm going to make. I can also add, sort of
points to a plot. In this case, I going to
add points where the X values are a
sequence from 0 to 200 in equal intervals.
And then the y-values are a sequence from
0 to 20,000. or 2, sorry 200,000, in equal
intervals as well. And so what you can see
here is that I, I have a set of dots that
line out along those values. And so.
In this particular case this set of dots
and this line aren't necessarily useful.
Although, this line might tell you, you
know, these are only the individuals that
have, on the right hand side, that have a
commuting time of greater than 100, and on
the left hand side less than 100 minutes.
, But you can use these sort of lines and
dots to give yourself breakpoints in the
picture and to communicate the specific
results. We'll also use these commands,
lines and points to actually add the
fitted values for models when we get
statistical modeling. The other thing that
you can do is, you might want to able to
visualize numeric variables as factors so
sometimes what want to be able t o do is
make a plot here; again, of a relationship
between commuting time and wage. And you
might want to able to break it down by
age, and as I showed you previously,
Breaking it down by age was actually kind
of hard to see if we use the size of the
points to represent age as a continuous
variable. So what you can do is you can
break age up into a factor. And so
remember, the cut2 command take this
continuous variable and breaks it up into
five equal intervals. And then assigns
each point as a factor to one of those
different intervals. And so what we can do
then is, when we make this plot, we can
actually color the plot by the age groups
that I've created. And so now this, the
plot will have five different colors, one
corresponding to each of the different age
groups. And so this makes it easier to
sort of see if there's a difference in
distribution across the ages. It doesn't
appear that For this plot there's a big
difference in the age distribution.
comparing wages and commuting time, but in
other plots it might be really useful to
be able to see if there's a sort of
relationship that's been modified by a
third variable. And one way that's very
common to do that is with this factor. A
really common occurrence is, when you're
making a scatterplot, is that you'll have
a large number of points. So in this case
I've created two vectors, X and Y, and
each of them has about a 100,000 points
and I plot them against each other again
with filled in circles as the, The
character that I am using to make the
plot. And you can see that it actually
ends up just looking like a big lump of
black. And the reason why is because all
of these points overlay each other, and so
you actually can't see the distinctions
between those points. So this is a very
common occurrence, and it's sort of not
informative. What's going on here in the
middle, you might not know it, there's a
ton of points right here in the center and
there's also a large number here, but not
quite as many. So, it's a good idea to be
able to tr y different things to see
what's going on when you have a large
number of points. One idea is to sample
the values. So we talked about sampling in
the earlier lectures, and so what I could
do is again generate that x and y value,
and what I can do is sample observations
say 1000 observations between the x and y
values. You want to actually sample the
same values for both x and y, because you
actually want to plot the values of x
versus the values of y that you've
observed. And so what I can do is then
subset x by the sampled values, and subset
y by the same sampled values, and I get a
plot that looks a little bit less like a
black ball here in the middle, and looks a
little bit more like a set of points. I
could actually subsample even further. If
I wanted to be able to see the plot-,
plots more neatly, since I've taken a
random sample. I still get an idea of the
relationship between these 2 variables,
particularly, for exploratory analysis.
You don't necessarily need to see all of
the points. A random subsample of the
points can give you a l-, a big idea about
the relationship between the variables.
Another option is to use what's called a
smoothScatter. So, again I have the x
variable and the y variable, and if I,
instead of saying plot, I use
smoothScatter and x and y. What it does is
it creates what's called a smooth density
plot. So what this does is, it shows
places where there are lots of points in
darker colors, so the darker here in the
center means that there's a lot of points
there. Then, there get to be slightly
fewer points in this ring here. And then,
slightly fewer points as you go farther
away. And then it shows individual
outlying points as hard dots like this. So
what this allows you to do is to visualize
the relationship between these two
variables without actually having to see
all of the points themselves. Another way
that you can do this is with the hexbin
package, and so what you can do is you can
take x and y and create a hexbin object
using x and y, and so what that does is it
breaks the, the set of y values and the
set of x values up into these hexagonal
bins, and then what it does is it counts
the number of points in each x, hexagonal
bin, and so again you see darker colors
mean that there are more points. So there
are points here in the centre. than in the
bins that are sort of farther and farther
out here on the outside. So this is
another way that you can sort of look,
visualize when you have a lot of different
points. Sorry, a lot of points you can
visualize the relationship between x and
y. So another type of plot is called a
QQ-plot and this is sort of like a
scatterplot, but has a very particular
purpose. And so what it does is it takes
two variables, again you're going to be
looking usually at quantitative variables
with QQ-plots. So I've generated x and y
are our quantitative variables. And I pass
it to this command qqplot(x,y), and what
that does is it plots the quantiles of x
versus the quantiles of y. So you can
think of it as this is the, sort of the
smallest quantile or percentile of x,
versus the smallest percentile of y. Say
this is the, well you know, the first
percentile, all the way up to say, the
hundredth percentile of x and y. So if the
2 distributions are exactly the same,
you'd expect these quantiles to land
perfectly on. The 45 degree line which
I've shown here using the abline command.
So the abline command takes 2 parameters
this is equal to the intercept and then
this is equal to slope. So if you give it
the parameters 0 and 1, it actually just
makes the 45 degree line. And so we can
see is that the quantiles down here for y
are slightly larger than the quantiles for
x, and so this gives you a little bit of
information about the distributions. This
will particularly useful if you're looking
at normal distributions and you want to
see if your data are normally distributed.
You can make a Q, Q plot with normal data
versus the observed data, and you can see
if there's large deviations from this line
that the data are likely not normally
distributed. I'll show plots like this as
we go on in the modeling section of the
course. The other thing that you can do,
and this often comes up, is that you have
data that where you want to plot, actually
observations over time or observations
that are observed longitudinally. So, what
we've got here is a matrix x, and so I'm
generating again a random matrix. So it's
a matrix that has 20 rows and five
columns. And so I just generate 100 normal
random variables and put them into that
matrix. And then what I'm going to do is,
I'm going to use matplot to actually be
able to plot the different columns of that
matrix, and what matplot does is, it takes
each column and will plot it. As one
specific line. So, the black line with the
1's is in the first column of
observations, the red line with the 2's is
the second column of observations, and so
forth. And so what this allows you to do,
is if you observe data over the time You
can actually compare the trends or
trajectories over time by looking at the
trajectories across columns. So this is a
commonly used when you're doing either
longitudinal or time series data analysis.
And they're also called spaghetti plots,
because this plot kind of looks like
spaghetti I guess. Another kind of plot
that you'll be seeing a lot of in this
class are heat maps and so what a heat map
is, it's sort of like a 2 D histogram. So,
what I've done here is, I made an image, I
used the image command to make the heat
map, and what it is, is it's, so I have a
matrix of values. So this, in this case I
took the values from our data set that are
in the first ten rows and in columns 161
to 236. And so I made an image of those
where the brighter the color in this case,
the larger the value. So the white here is
the largest value, and the red are the
lowest values. And so what you can see is
you can actually visualize the whole
matrix of observations that you've got,
all in one plot. And, so, and color
represents the sort of intensity or the
size of the observati on that you have. So
this, if you have sort of a good eye,
you'll see that this is a little bit, when
you make an image plot using the image
command, it's a little bit confusing.
Because the first thing that it does is,
it sort of makes a transpose of the data.
So remember, we're looking at columns 161
to 236 of the data set. But in the image
the columns are actually placed in the
rows of this image. So, to, to sort of
make it match your intuition of what
should be in rows and what should be in
columns, you actually have to do this kind
of funky transformation. So, what you do
is you create your new matrix it's just a
matrix of the data set so this is a data
frame before and I'm just changing it to
have class matrix. This is Only done
because I need to use a matrix to be able
to perform the operation that I'm going to
perform here and pass to the image
command. And so what I do is I take the
transpose of the matrix and then I reorder
it so that the sort of the columns or the
transposed, or flipped order. So this
seems like a crazy command, and there's no
intuition or rhyme or reason behind it,
other than the fact that, when you do this
particular flipping and reordering of the
data set, and then make the image, you now
get in the rows, the rows of your data
set, and in the columns, the columns of
your data set. So that the image maps a
little bit more to your intuition about
what this matrix should look like. So
you'll be seeing this transposed and then
flipping the rows come up over and over
again when I make a heat map. And again,
remember the only reason why I'm doing
that is so that the, the image maps,
matches your intuition of the matrix. So
I'm going to give you, this is another
area where, there's a huge amount of
information that you could learn about
plotting on geographic maps, but I'm just
going to show you the very basics in r, so
if you use these maps package, if you load
the maps library And you type Map of the
World. You'll get actually this map here
with all the black lines rep resenting the
actual geographic outline of the world and
the countries in the world. You can then
generate some latitude and longitude
values. In this case I've just generated
them randomly. And if you add points to
this map, you can actually add points in
latitude and longitude values and they'll
appear on the map according to the
latitudes and longitudes that you've
developed. Or that you generated. So you
can also use different maps. There's a map
of United States. There's map of Europe
and so forth. If you look in the map
package, you can find a lot more about
creating different kinds of maps and then
overlaying points on those maps that
represent your data. A quick note on
missing values. So one of the things you
can use plots for is understanding
patterns in your data and one of the
patterns that you'll very commonly run
into is missing values. And so here I've
generated a vector X that has three
missing values at the beginning. Then I've
generated a vector Y that has values one
to ten. And so if I plot X versus Y, I can
see that the first. 3 values just don't
appear on the plot. So what r does is
anytime it sees a missing value in a
scatter plot, its just not going to plot
that point. That's an important thing to
keep in mind because if you have missing
values and they're contributing to
changing with the patterns between the 2
variables are, the relationship between
the 2 variables. If you don't deal with
the fact that r just sort of skips those
over you might get sort of inappropriate
or incorrect conclusions from the graph
that you're making. Making.
Another thing that you can do, though, is
use the box plot command that we saw
earlier, and actually see the distribution
of n-a's comparing, different groups. So,
here I've generated two vectors, x and y,
each of a, a hundred normal random
variables. And then I, Create all of the
values where x is less than zero, I make
to be n/a values in the y vector. And so,
then what I can do is, I can actually say
okay, is there a relationship between the
missing values and y and the values of x?
X. And, the way that I do that is I make a
box plot of x, and again, I use this til,
tilde, to say, okay, I'm going to compare
values where, y is equal to n-a, or y is
not equal to n-a. And so, if you do that,
you can actually see very clearly that
when y is equal to n-a, the x values are
small. And when y is not equal to n-a, you
see the x values are big. So this type of
plot can actually be used to explore the
data. And see if there's relationships
between missing values and the other
variables in your data set, which might
lead to incor, incorrect statistical
conclusions from your data. So I have just
barely scraped the surface of graphing in
R, even for exploratory graphics. And so
I'm going to give you some resources here.
the R Graph Gallery has a bunch of
different graphs, along with corresponding
R codes when making those graphs. ggplot2
and the documentation for ggplot2 are
here. ggplot2 is an entirely different
graphing mechanism apart from the base r
graphing mechanism. It allows you to make
very pretty plots, but also allows
flexibility in a lot of different ways for
exploring data. Similarly the lattice
package is another add-on package that
allows you to do a lot more flexible sort
of plotting, than you can in the base R
package. Finally I've linked here to a
blog, R bloggers, where people frequently
post interesting R code for performing
different kinds of graphs that might be
useful for more sort of exotic data sets
than we've been talking about here.
